+++
Description = ""
date = "2016-06-28T15:39:34+01:00"
title = "Announcing the LibreCores design contest and ORConf 2016"

+++

Our friends and collaborators at the [Free and Open Source Silicon 
Foundation](http://fossi-foundation.org/) have launched the [LibreCores design 
contest](http://librecores.org/designcontest). This is a student design 
contest which aims to recognise and reward contributions to the open source 
hardware ecosystem. The main evaluation criteria are:

* Openness. Your work must be published under an established Open Source
license.
* Reusability. How easily can your work be used and modified by someone else?
Is it well documented? Do you plan to continue to work on your project and help
others to get started?
* Usefulness. Is your work filling a much-needed gap in the world of Open
Source hardware design? Something that was not there before?

See the [design contest site](http://librecores.org/designcontest) for full 
details. The deadline for submission is August 31st, 2016. Entrants will have 
the opportunity to present their work at [ORConf](http://openrisc.io/orconf/), 
with some travel funding available thanks to the sponsors.

This neatly leads me to the next activity I wanted to highlight in this post.
Again, thanks to the hard work of our friends at FOSSi, registration is [now 
open for ORConf 2016](http://openrisc.io/orconf/). To quote that page: "ORCONF 
is an open source digital design and embedded systems conference, covering 
areas of electronics from the transistor level up to Linux user space and 
beyond.  Expect presentations and discussion on free and open source IP 
projects, implementations on FPGA and in silicon, verification, EDA tools, 
licensing and embedded software".

[Last year's ORConf](http://openrisc.io/orconf/2015/) was the biggest and most 
enthusiastic event focused on open source digital design I've ever been to, 
and saw the birth of the FOSSi Foundation. Please do register to attend and 
submit talks. With the growing interest in open source hardware and open 
source digital logic design, I expect it will be even bigger and better than 
last year. ORConf 2016 will be held at the University of Bologna in Italy 
between October 7th and October 9th. [Register 
now](http://openrisc.io/orconf/).

_Alex Bradbury_
