+++
Description = ""
date = "2017-09-18T08:15:00+00:00"
title = "We're hiring! Work on making open source hardware a reality"

+++
We are looking for a talented hardware engineer to join the lowRISC team and 
help make our vision for an open source, secure, and flexible SoC a reality. 
[Apply now](https://lowrisc.workable.com/j/DBAC61322F)!

lowRISC C.I.C. is a not-for-profit company that aims to demonstrate, promote 
and support the use of open-source hardware. The lowRISC project was 
established in 2014 with the aim of bringing the benefits of open-source to 
the hardware world. It is working to do this by producing a high quality, 
secure, open, and flexible System-on-Chip (SoC) platform. lowRISC C.I.C. also 
provides hardware and software services to support the growing RISC-V 
ecosystem. Our expertise includes the LLVM Compiler, hardware security 
extensions and RISC-V tools, hardware and processor design.

The successful candidate will be interested in computer architecture and 
hardware design. The primary focus of the role will be the development of the 
lowRISC SoC platform, which will involve work to evaluate and extend our 
current design including our general-purpose tagged-memory system. lowRISC is 
an ambitious project with a small core team, so you will be heavily involved 
in the project's development direction. This role will involve frequent work 
with external contributors and collaborators. While much of the work will be 
at the hardware level the post will offer experience of the full 
hardware/software stack, higher-level simulation tools and architectural 
design issues.

Some practical experience of hardware design with a HDL such as 
Verilog/SystemVerilog is essential, as is a good knowledge of the HW/SW stack. 
Ideally, candidates will also have experience or demonstrated interest in some 
of: SoC design, large-scale open source development, hardware or software 
security, technical documentation, board support package development and 
driver development. Industrial experience and higher degree levels are valued, 
but we would be happy to consider an enthusiastic recent graduate with a 
strong academic record.

Informal enquires should be made to Alex Bradbury <asb@lowrisc.org>.
