+++
Description = ""
date = "2019-10-23T10:00:00+01:00"
title = "Introducing Greg & Tom"
+++

_Greg Chadwick and Tom Roberts recently joined lowRISC’s growing engineering
team. They’ve both taken some time to share a little about what they’re doing at
lowRISC and what motivated them to join._

### Greg

{{< img class="float-right rounded m-2" width=300 src="greg_chadwick.jpg" alt="Greg Chadwick photo" title="Greg Chadwick" >}}

"It’s an exciting time to join the lowRISC team! Our Ibex core provides a solid
foundation and clearly demonstrates the value of open source silicon, which I’m
excited to be working on. My work so far has focused on the performance of Ibex;
whilst it’s not intended as a high performance core there are various things we
can do to improve it without major impact to area or power. I’m experimenting
with these improvements as well as building infrastructure to help profile
program execution. I’ll be writing some blog posts to explain these as the work
progresses. On top of that I’ve been writing some more Ibex documentation to go
into the details of how the pipeline works, you can check it out at
https://ibex-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ .

"Before lowRISC I worked at Arm and Broadcom. At Arm I worked as a design
engineer on the memory systems of A-class CPU cores. During my time there I
worked on the Cortex-A55, Cortex-A65AE and Neoverse E1, as well as yet
unannounced products. I was also involved in designing memory system
microarchitecture and analysing performance. At Broadcom I worked on the V3D GPU
(as seen in the Raspberry Pi) where again I was involved in microarchitecture
and performance analysis.

"At lowRISC, I am going to utilise my industry experience to help produce high
quality IP. I enjoy the opportunity to work in the open, in a collaborative
fashion and hope we can drive the industry forward with new tools and techniques
that might otherwise remain siloed and locked up in closed source companies.

"I’m interested in seeing how much of the hardware design process we can open up
at lowRISC. Right now to achieve a high-quality tapeout proprietary tools,
documentation and libraries are required. This contrasts hugely with the
software world where industry leading tools, like GCC and LLVM, and industry
leading software, like the Linux kernel, are open. It’s a massive challenge, but
by developing high quality IP we can help drive forward open silicon tools and
contribute to them ourselves. By sharing our work with great documentation and
writing about how we did it all we can help others follow in our footsteps and
explore new paths."

### Tom

{{< img class="float-right rounded m-2" width=300 src="tom_roberts.jpg" alt="Tom Roberts photo" title="Tom Roberts" >}}

"Now is a very exciting time to be involved in open source silicon, and lowRISC
is at the heart of it. Change is coming to the industry as a whole, not just to
silicon IP, but from EDA tools all the way to fabrication. I joined lowRISC to
be part of the changes, and to help shape the future of the semiconductor
industry.

"Prior to joining lowRISC, I worked at Arm in various CPU design and
verification roles. There I gained experience of high-quality low-power design
and industry leading design verification techniques. In my time at Arm I
contributed to various CPU products, including Cortex-R7, Cortex-M7, Cortex-A53,
Cortex-A65AE, Cortex-A55 and other as-yet unannounced designs.

"Since joining lowRISC in August I have been working on improving the Ibex CPU
as well as investigating new approaches to design verification. I am looking
forward to what the future holds!"

----

We’re thrilled to have Greg and Tom onboard to help propel our open source
hardware efforts forward. We have a number of open job openings - take a look at
our  [jobs page]({{< ref "jobs" >}}) to find out more.

_Alex Bradbury, CTO and Co-Founder_
