+++
Description = ""
date = "2019-05-16T17:50:00+01:00"
title = "lowRISC Expands and Appoints New Members to the Board of Directors from Google and ETH Zurich"
slug = "lowrisc-expands-press-release"

+++

_London, England - lowRISC C.I.C., the open source system on a chip (SoC)
organisation, today announced that Prof. Luca Benini (ETH Zurich), Dominic
Rizzo (Google) and Ron Minnich (Google) have joined its board of directors.
The announcement coincides with a new phase of hiring by lowRISC with the goal
of significantly increasing the size of its Cambridge-based engineering team
during 2019._

{{< img src="board1.jpg" title="lowRISC board" >}}

lowRISC is a not-for-profit, community-driven organisation working to provide
a high quality, security-enabling, open SoC base for derivative designs. The
organisation is lowering the barrier to producing custom silicon, enabling
research and FPGA experimentation, and establishing a vibrant ecosystem around
open silicon designs. lowRISC supports a core engineering team who collaborate
with industry partners, academic groups, and the wider community to drive the
open source silicon ecosystem.

"We are very pleased to welcome new board members from Google and ETH Zurich
who share our excitement about the future of open-source hardware. Their
commitment will accelerate our roadmap for delivering high-quality open-source
system-on-chip designs,” said Alex Bradbury, CTO and co-founder of lowRISC
CIC.

lowRISC also revealed that Google are providing support and funding to further
their mission and that Prof. Benini's group at ETH Zürich are contributing
their Zero-riscy processor core. lowRISC, in collaboration with Prof. Benini’s
PULP team and Google, will continue development of the core as
“[Ibex](https://github.com/lowRISC/ibex/)”.

“I’m delighted to join the lowRISC board. lowRISC plays a key role in the
open-source hardware ecosystem, providing engineering resources while
maintaining a clear community-focused vision and not-for-profit status. We are
excited that they will be able to contribute to the continued development of
Zero-riscy and also provide the necessary ongoing support,” said Prof. Benini.

Google engineers Ron Minnich and Dominic Rizzo are long term supporters of
open-source. Ron is a well known figure in the High Performance Computing
field and inventor of LinuxBIOS, now known as coreboot, the firmware used in
all Chromebooks. Dominic leads efforts in open source silicon and security
fobs at Google.

"Google believes that open source is good for everyone. To further our
commitment, we are investing both capital and engineering resources to create
a sustainable open source hardware ecosystem. In addition to engineering
resources, lowRISC provides the community stewardship that is vital to this
vision,” said Royal Hansen, vice president of Security, Google.

Please visit our [jobs]({{< ref "jobs" >}}) page for more
information on how lowRISC is expanding our engineering organization.

## About lowRISC

lowRISC C.I.C. is a not-for-profit company that aims to demonstrate, promote
and support the use of open-source hardware - bringing the benefits of
open-source to the hardware world. We are producing high-quality,
security-focused, open, and flexible IP. Our expertise includes the LLVM
Compiler, novel hardware security extensions and RISC-V tools, hardware and
processor design.

For more information, please contact:

Media Contact:
Andrew Back
lowRISC
press@lowrisc.org
